March the 25th or 6th 27th sitting at 800 Delma Street in Bryan chatting with one of the truly distinguished members of the chemistry faculty whom all of us knew knew is Dr. Tex Isbell check your mic no just say something one two three how's that
Let's begin this story of your experience here with your giving a brief autobiographical summary of your experience before you came to A&M.
Where were you born, grew up, go to college, mom and dad and all that.
Haskell, I was born in Lubbock, Texas, although my father was a Baptist minister and actually lived in Rawls.
But Lubbock was the nearest place where there was a hospital in those days.
And so that's where I was born in 1917, February 12, 1917.
Always been proud of the date because it was Abe Lincoln's birthday also.
A year after my birth in 1918, my father came down with the terrible flu epidemic and it went into tuberculosis and he was never able to get rid of that because there was really no good medical treatment for it in those days.
He lived for another ten years, but in the meantime, we moved to San Antonio where I grew up my first nine years.
Early days were not very pleasant because we were pretty destitute.
He could not hold a job of any kind.
There were days when we literally didn't have anything in the house for the next meal, and then, amazingly enough, a friend would drive by with three or four sacks of groceries.
I don't know how we survived, but we did.
When he died in 1928, my mother was left with me, the older child, and two younger sisters.
And she had some early training and a little bit of college.
She was a good speaker.
and so she taught speech and acting and things like that.
She was able to get a job in 1928 at San Marcos Baptist Academy in San Marcos, Texas as a speech teacher.
That was not a great experience either because the Depression was coming on.
San Marcos Academy was a private prep school type operation.
Most of their students came from West Texas ranches and farms and from families
who had broken up and neither parent really wanted to take any responsibility for the youngsters, so they sent them there.
So we had some pretty interesting kids there.
I graduated from high school in 1933 at San Marcos Academy, and it was
as bad a time during the Depression as I can remember.
And we were truly destitute, so my mother had a younger sister who had married a farmer, a very good farmer, who lived about seven miles out of the town of Hollis, Oklahoma.
And they wrote us and said, come on up to Hollis,
we don't have any money but we have all the food that anybody needs to eat we can raise on our farm so you won't starve and that's what we did.
We went up there about the first of June and I worked on a farm up there and
I learned that I really didn't like farming that much.
But in any event, when I graduated from high school, I wanted to be a chemist.
received a Gilbert chemistry set from a favorite uncle in San Antonio.
At Christmas around 1926, I was nine years old so I could get the date down a little more precisely than that, but in any event, I was literally turned on by that chemistry set.
I would go around and pick up colored rocks and wondered why some rocks were red and some were blue and things like that.
I knew it was the chemistry and the rocks.
I didn't know what chemists did, but I was convinced that they must have a great fun in their lives.
And so that's what I wanted to do, but when I graduated from high school in 1933, I had absolutely no hopes of ever going to college.
And so in the following fall, around January 1st of 1934,
I received a letter, a surprising letter, from the president of Baylor University, Pat M. Neff.
Pat Neff and my father had grown up on adjacent farms in Coriel County, literally adjacent farms.
They were close friends, had gone to school together even a couple, three years at Baylor.
My dad went on from there to the Southwestern Theological Seminary, and I don't know whether he graduated from Baylor or not, but
In any event, he and Pat Neff were close friends, and Neff had heard from one of my aunts, who was also of course a close friend, that I had graduated from high school and wanted in the worst way to go to college, but had no idea that I could ever get there.
His letter said to me,
I understand you would like to go to college.
I will offer you something.
You can come to Baylor University if that's where you would like to attend college.
I will see to it that you get all the work that you need to do to work your way through Baylor, and whether you make it or not will be entirely up to you.
So Baylor was on the trimester system at that time, and so at the beginning of the third trimester, third quarter actually, I guess it would be that year, sometime in February, I went to Baylor and matriculated.
I was the only chemistry major in those days at Baylor's, to the best of my knowledge.
Baylor had a good med school, and so they had, I guess, pretty good biology and chemistry pre-med courses.
The chemistry courses were not designed for chemistry majors, and the net result was I had a great time there.
I was a laboratory instructor for a couple of years.
I did about every kind of job on the Baylor campus you could do.
I was the night telephone
switchboard operator for a while because the switchboard was located in the old science building and after six o'clock
There was nobody over there, and they didn't allow the girls to go over there and work until the telephone was turned off at 10, so I would go over there and operate the switchboard.
I even posed in the art department, semi-nude, things of that sort.
The Good Baptist didn't know that for a long time.
Anyway, I managed to get through Baylor and graduated from there in May, about the 1st of June of 1937.
Again, a terrible year of the Depression.
I thought for a while that since I was getting a bachelor's degree in chemistry, there would be all kinds of employers that would be looking to hire me.
It wasn't true.
I sent out about 40 letters inquiring about jobs to every chemical type company in Texas, Louisiana, and Oklahoma.
Got back, I think, five
replies that said they had nothing and the rest of the people didn't reply.
When I graduated, I had $25 that this favorite uncle had given me, that had given me the chemistry set.
He claimed that it was the last bit of my father's
but that wasn't true, and I knew it.
He was doing what he could to help me out, and that's all the money I had.
I looked for a job for four months.
I hitchhiked all over Texas, Louisiana, Oklahoma, slept under bridges and culverts.
Looking back, I have no idea how I survived for four months on $25, but I did.
I did because I didn't have any choice.
Finally, I was able on the 1st of October to start work in Dallas at First Texas Chemical Manufacturing Company, and I was their only chemist.
I analyzed their products.
They were a pharmaceutical manufacturing company.
I worked there for a year and a half,
at the magnificent starting salary of $100 a month.
In the second year, they raised me to $125 a month, which, after all, was a 25% increase.
But I was doing all I could to survive living in the YMCA and sending my mother and two sisters all the money that I didn't absolutely have to have to survive.
I was trying my best to figure out some way to get into graduate school because during that summer when I was looking for a job unsuccessfully, I walked into the mobile oil company headquarters in Dallas and walked into the office where they hired people.
and told this gentleman that I was a graduate of Baylor with a bachelor's degree in chemistry and I would like to work for a mobile oil company.
He looked at me for a little while without saying anything and then he said,
Young man, let me tell you, if you had a PhD in chemistry, I would probably hire you because there are not many PhD chemists these days.
If you had a master's degree, I would talk to you maybe.
We might be able to find some place for you, but with only a bachelor's degree,
they're a dime a dozen, don't waste my time, and I won't waste yours.
And so I found out that day what I absolutely had to do.
I had to figure out some way to get to graduate school.
That, the fall of 1938,
A friend of mine in Dallas who had graduated from the University of Texas took me to Austin over the Thanksgiving holidays that he was going to spend with his two parents.
While there, I went to the chemistry department and talked to the acting head of the chemistry department whose name was Henry Rudolph Henze.
All the four profs that had made the University of Texas chemistry department the best chemistry department in the South in those days, all of them were Germans.
Tough old Germans.
And I said, I want to go to graduate school, but I have no money.
Is there some way I can go to the University of Texas graduate school in the chemistry department?
He said, well, I'm sorry to tell you this.
We have teaching assistant jobs that we give to graduate students here, but they are all, have already been
allocated for next fall.
There are none.
And I guess he saw my face fall pretty badly and he said, but I'll make a deal with you.
If you really want to come here,
We have two courses that all graduates, entering graduate students must take and pass.
They are technique courses that all chemists need when they go into a research laboratory.
The first is called organic qualitative analysis where you identify unknown compounds and the second is organic qualitative analysis where you need to learn to do all the
analytical procedures for determining the structure of a compound.
And he said, if you make A's in both of these courses, and in September there happens to be the need for another laboratory instructor in freshman chemistry, you get the job.
And I said, I'll be here on the first of June because I figured I had no choice again.
It turned out that my chemistry background at Baylor was atrocious.
He, my first professor that summer, taught both courses, was an old German from Fredericksburg who had never learned to speak English at all, really.
And it took me two months to learn to decipher his Germanic English.
And then he was talking about, found out that he was talking about things that I had never heard of before.
And I would turn to a student next to me and say, do you know what he's talking about?
Oh yes, we had that at LSU or we had that at Georgia Tech.
and I found out that I was in bad trouble, so I would, at the end of each of those classes, the class met every day, a lecture from 11 till 12.
I then ate my lunch from 1 o'clock until whenever we worked in the laboratory that summer, learning to do these analytical procedures.
So I would run into the library, chemistry library, they had one in the chemistry building, after every lecture and read up on some books to find out what I should have known, but didn't know.
So that summer was tough, and I had to make A's in those two courses.
And I never went back to my room before 12 o'clock at night, and there were nights that I stayed up there working until 2 o'clock.
And then in the middle of the summer, something that unexpected happened to me.
A man who was employed by the Southern Regional Research Laboratories in New Orleans dropped by.
He had known me because he came by and picked up samples when I worked in Dallas for the pharmaceutical company.
And it was their job to ride herd on us to be sure that we were not putting out products that contain the wrong amount of ingredient.
And mainly these products that they were analyzing and were concerned about were
were the hypodermic tablets, strychnine, morphine, codeine, and things like that.
So he knew me.
And we'd gotten to be fairly friendly and he dropped by at the end of this first course at the University of Texas and called me up and said, I have a job to offer you at Southern Regional Research Laboratories and it pays $2,400 a year.
which I didn't know anybody made, and we would like for you to accept the job.
And I said, how much time do I have to give you an answer?
He said, well, I'll be here for 24 hours.
I'll call you 24 hours later.
And he did.
He said, OK, what's your answer?
And I said, I'm going to turn your job down.
It was not easy to do because I badly need
money to survive.
But I know if I ever leave the University of Texas graduate school, I'll never get back.
And so I did.
I made an A in the first course and I made an A in the second course.
I was not going to make anything less than that.
And the head of the chemistry department, Dr. Henze, called me into his office and said, I have a job for you.
And we needed another person to teach freshman laboratories.
And no, that was not true.
These two tough old Germans, Henze and Lochte, had gotten together and said, I'm sure.
here's this crazy kid here working his tail off.
He needs to get into graduate school.
Let's make it possible for him to do it by creating another section of freshman chemistry.
I accused him of that later, much later, and they both denied it, but I know it was true.
So,
I got my masters in 41 and my PhD in 43.
In 42, I married my wonderful wife, Edith.
She was a microbiologist and was a very beautiful lady.
the best dancer I've ever danced with in my life, and an exceedingly smart young lady.
Smartest thing I ever did in life was to marry Edith.
A year later, I got my Ph.D.
in 1943, and I accepted a job which were— the war was on, and jobs suddenly were— I had 15 offers of jobs at that time.
I accepted a job with General Mills Research Laboratories in Minneapolis, Minnesota,
Because we were just curious about—we both were native Texans, never been out of the state, and decided to see what other part of the world looked like.
And it was a fortunate decision.
I worked for General Mills for seven years until 1950.
They treated me exceedingly well.
I was a successful chemist for them.
I produced, among other things, the first truly synthetic detergent that was ever developed.
I have three patents on it.
General Mills had decided that they wanted a chemistry division to develop ways to use their waste products in their milling operations, but they were a food company.
An excellent food company, they knew nothing about chemistry.
And when I produced this unique synthetic detergent, they didn't know how to market it.
It sat on a shelf.
until about two years after I left there, around 1952 or 53, it suddenly occurred to me, gee, maybe we should put this product on the market.
But it was too late, really, because they had lost the advantage of a rather remarkable product.
I could see that although I enjoyed my work up there, I could see that I was in the wrong place.
And I didn't much care for the long Minnesota winters.
And so I obtained a job in Memphis, Tennessee in a small specialty chemical company.
where I worked for two years and it was the only job I ever had that I really didn't like.
Everybody, in my opinion, should have one job they don't like to be able to appreciate the good jobs they have.
At the end of the year and a half, I was contacted by Monsanto Chemical Company
They had just gotten a contract from what was then called the U.S.
Chemical Corps to do, of all things, develop a large-scale commercial synthesis of nerve gas.
During World War II,
The American forces, the Allied forces, had picked up a couple of barges of nerve gas on the Rhine and knew what it was, but it was a very, very strange chemical.
The Russians had captured all the German scientists and had taken them to Russia and
By 1950, they were telling the US military, we have nerve gas and you guys better shape up or else.
This was a rush project, and I was picked because I was told by the people Monsanto had contacted at General Mills Research Laboratories.
They told Monsanto that I was an excellent experimental chemist, and I was.
So I went to Monsanto on September 1st of 1951.
and this contract was for one year.
We hadn't the foggiest idea how to make this compound.
There was a little bit of literature on the generals.
These were compounds that contained a phosphorus atom attached to carbon, a carbon, and these so-called organophosphorus compounds no one in this country had ever worked on.
And so there was very little known and we sat, there were 12 of us in this project.
And the surprising thing to me was that when I arrived in Anniston, Alabama, where this work was to be done, one of their Monsanto's division laboratories,
I found that there were a total of 12 people that were going to work on this project, and they, two of the supervisors of the project had been Monsanto employees for a number of years.
and within a week I found out that I was the third supervisor and that we would work together.
Sounded like a bit of a strange arrangement, but it was not.
These two other people that I worked with were excellent chemists.
They were theoretical chemists.
They were not very good in the laboratory, but they also knew how to work with people, and the three of us
divided up the job and worked together remarkably well.
I won't go into all of that story except to say that we had come up with, we did not have to make the final product which is commonly called sarin, S-A-R-I-N.
It is exceedingly toxic, one milligram
If it just gets on your clothes, it will go through an intact scan and you will be dead in a very short time.
If you inhale a small amount of the vapor, it's like somebody hits you over the head with a cement post.
You go down and unless somebody can get an anecdote to you, within 30 seconds you're dead.
We had the anecdote which is atropine solution in hypodermics around the laboratory and we knew how to use them if necessary.
We never had to.
We knew what we were working with.
We never had to make the final product though.
We finally came up with
four steps to get from readily available starting materials to the final product sarin, but the last step was already known.
It could be carried out in a quantitative yield.
We didn't have to do that.
We did have to get
the product of the third step, and all of these products were, all of these steps, we were told, had to be carried out in a continuous flow method and give at least 95 percent yields.
So those were pretty hard things to come by, but we spent a lot of time on the first step.
and a fair amount of time on the second step.
We only had three steps, but when we had completed our work on the second step, we only had two weeks to go.
I thought there was no hopes of doing the third step.
We sat around in the laboratory, all 12 of us,
tossed ideas around and finally decided that what we needed to do was to replace a propoxy group, if you know what that is, with a chlorine atom.
attached, and these were attached to the phosphorus atom.
There were two propoxy groups on the phosphorus atom.
We had to knock off one of these and replace it with one chlorine atom, no more.
The product, the chlorine product containing product, was about 1,000th as toxic as sarin, and so we were, the last product we were
would be working with would be an exceedingly toxic chemical too.
We finally decided on a procedure and I won't go into details on that.
We had a liquid that we had to introduce a reagent into to carry out this transformation, this replacement of a isopropoxy group with a chlorine atom.
We finally decided that the reagent we would try would be phosgene, an exceedingly toxic chemical itself, but we had it piped into all of our fume hoods in the laboratories there because this laboratory
worked on isocyanates and isocyanate resins and these required phosgene and so we were equipped with phosgene and we thought that this reagent might just work.
I was selected to carry out the experiment, so I bubbled phosgene into a flask of this other reagent for about an hour and weighed the flask and only a small amount of phosgene had dissolved.
And I had developed a little device in the laboratories, General Mills' laboratories, that was an exceedingly efficient device for dissolving gases and liquids.
So I pulled, went in the laboratory, or the glass-blowing room, and made one of these small ones, and put it in this flask.
and inside of 30 minutes I had dissolved exactly the right amount of phosgene in this flask, in this other chemical.
Let it stand overnight, distilled it the next day.
I recovered a 96% yield of the pure material, having the chlorine atom
on the phosphorus atom in the right place.
In one experiment, fortunately, we solved a problem about two weeks before our project was over.
I can only look back on that as a truly remarkable thing.
I don't take any credit for it.
I happen to have the little device that allowed me to dissolve the phosgene in the other reagent, but the rest of it just turned out serendipitously.
That's all I can say.
But, and so I stayed on, when that project was over, I stayed on and worked at Monsanto for an additional year, and I would like to have continued working for them.
They were a good company, they treated me well, but they came to me one day and said, you have received the last promotion and the last raise you can receive and still stay in the laboratory.
You have to accept a desk job and we are offering you a job as assistant or associate director of research.
I didn't want to be anything but a laboratory chemist.
That's all I've ever wanted to be.
I had also heard that the Monsanto at that time had decided to move all of their outlying divisional laboratories into their central headquarters in St.
Louis, and it was located in a very poor part of St.
Louis.
I didn't want to go up there, and I had been thinking, you know, I've done all the things as an industrial chemist that I had sort of set out to do.
I've accomplished all my objectives.
It might be fun to try my hand at teaching at a university.
and so I applied for a number at a number of places and was accepted at A&M.
The department head was Fred Jensen, and he wrote me a letter saying, you have been hired,
to be an assistant professor of chemistry at A&M starting in the fall of 1953, and I showed the letter to my wife, and she wandered off without saying anything, and for about an hour later she came back and said,
It never occurred to me that our two boys would turn out to be Aggies.
She being a good T-sip.
What was the pay in that first job?
$4,500 for nine months and no summer job at all.
And I was making $10,000 the last
year at Monsanto plus a $500 bonus.
So this this was a serious step down, not for me, for my family.
They had to suffer much the loss of a lot of
income, I was going to do the things that I thought I wanted to do by trying to become a professor of chemistry.
That first summer I was at A&M, I was able to get a job.
I had no income at all in the summertime.
I was able to get a job at the American Oil Company laboratories in Texas City.
They were kind enough
to offer me a pretty good paying job there for the summer.
And so that's the way we survived that first year.
By the second year, I had received a Welch grant which allowed me to pay myself a summer job to direct my research activities.
But it took me five years, as I recall, to get back to the salary I had.
I was making it at Monsanto when I left there.
Describe the department when you arrived, the Department of Chemistry.
Who was here?
Where was it?
What were the facilities and so forth?
Well, they were in the present chemistry building, although there have been at least three major additions to it since that time.
The old chemistry building was just a rectangular building that actually faced a fountain.
and all the additions have been put on the back side of that building.
It's got to be at least four times bigger now than it was at that time.
The department was pretty pathetic.
That's about the best description I can
give because they had just, two years before I arrived, they had just lost their accreditation from the American Chemical Society.
American Chemical Society said, you guys are doing such a lousy job, you get no recognition from us as being a qualified Department of Chemistry.
And so Fred Jensen had been hired, when that happened, to try to bring things back to a much better state than it was when they lost their accreditation.
But when I arrived, things were still pretty sad.
We had two people.
We had about a total of 12 people in the department, as I remember.
Two people were doing research and Fred Johnson was doing a little bit of research, but not a very large amount.
Kenny Hancock was one of the two people doing research and I can't remember the physical chemist that we had at that time and he was doing, and he was a fine chemist.
and he went to Oak Ridge two or three years later, and so they lost him.
But the rest of the people had been hired over a period of years, and they had not tried to keep up with modern-day chemistry.
They talked
in the classroom but did no research of any kind.
Some of them were so bad that after a few years they were put on leave.
They received a salary but were told not to come to the chemistry department and teach anymore.
That's how bad things were.
In terms of the laboratory equipment, laboratories and the equipment, were they also behind the times there?
Very badly behind times.
I remember Fred Jensen in maybe this letter where he told me that I had been hired said,
I understand you want to do some research.
Send me a list of things that you probably will need, and I'll see if I can't find some money to get it.
And I didn't know what kind of a list to send him, but the list I sent
They didn't have.
They had lots of glassware for freshman chemistry, sophomore chemistry, junior chemistry courses.
They had no electronic equipment of any kind, but that was before the development of any significant electronic devices for measuring things in chemistry anyway.
But when I arrived,
I had a vacuum pump, which I had asked for, which you can't get along without in an organic chemistry laboratory, and I can't think of what else that I may have had.
I don't know whether you know what a heating mantle is, but they are safer devices than heating with Bunsen burners.
because if you heat a flask of some highly flammable material in the flask breaks, you have a terrible fire.
The heating metal was made mainly of spun glass fiber and with heating elements buried in there,
I built my own heating mantles once I got here by taking a coffee can and making up a plaster of asbestos and I don't remember what the hardening agent was, and I embedded a heating wire down in there, rolls of heating wire, and I used them for a number of years.
Our facilities were atrocious.
nonexistent, as far as I was concerned, for any quality research work.
The Welsh Foundation, though, came aboard about the second year I was here, and once I received a Welsh grant, I had some funds to buy some pretty decent equipment.
Not a lot.
My total grant for, I got one of the first grants given by the Welch Foundation.
The total amount was $18,000 a year for three years, and that in those days was magnificent, at least at Texas A&M.
In that era, the department offered graduate degrees.
Yes, they did, but they sure had no right to.
We had about two or three graduate students there, and we only had one or two faculty members that were really qualified to give these students any kind of really good graduate training.
in the laboratory, and we had no graduate courses to speak of at all.
And so that didn't change for a while.